Implementation
==============

Components of the project
-------------------------

![**Major components of Oboe.js illustrating program flow from http
transport to application callbacks.** UML facet/receptacle notation is
used to show the flow of events and event names are given in capitals.
For clarity events are depicted as transferring directly between
publisher and subscriber but this is actually performed through an
intermediary. \label{overallDesign}](images/overallDesign.png)

Oboe's architecture describes a fairly linear pipeline visiting a small
number of tasks between receiving http content and notifying application
callbacks. The internal componentisation is designed primarily so that
automated testing can provide a high degree of confidence regarding the
correct working of the library. A local event bus facilitates
communication inside the Oboe instance and most components interact
solely by using this bus; receiving events, processing them, and
publishing further events in response. The use of an event bus is a
variation on the Observer pattern which removes the need for each unit
to locate specific other units before it may listen to their events,
giving a highly decoupled shape to the library in which each part knows
the events it requires but not who publishes them. Once everything is
wired into the bus no central control is required and the larger
behaviours emerge as the consequence of interaction between finer ones.

Design for automated testing
----------------------------

![**The test pyramid**. Much testing is done on the low-level components
of the system, less on their composed behaviours, and less still on a
whole-system level. \label{testpyramid}](images/testPyramid.png)

80% of the code written for this project is test specification. Because
the correct behaviour of a composition requires the correct behaviour of
its components, the majority are *unit tests*. The general style of a
unit test is to plug the item under test into a mock event bus and check
that when it receives input events the expected output events are
consequently published.

The *Component tests* step back from examining individual components to
a position where their behaviour as a composition may be examined.
Because the compositions are quite simple there are fewer component
tests than unit tests. The component tests do not take account of *how*
the composition is drawn and predominantly examine the behaviour of the
library through its public API. One exception is that the streamingXHR
component is switched for a stub so that http traffic can be simulated.

At the apex of the test pyramid are a small number of *integration
tests*. These verify Oboe as a black box without any knowledge of, or
access to, the internals, using the same API as is exposed to
application programmers. These tests are the most expensive to write but
a small number are necessary in order to verify that Oboe works
correctly end-to-end. Without access to the internals http traffic
cannot be faked so before these tests can be performed a corresponding
REST service is started. This test service is written using Node and
returns known content progressively according to predefined timings,
somewhat emulating a slow internet connection. The integration tests
particularly verify behaviours where platform differences could cause
inconsistencies. For example, the test url `/tenSlowNumbers` writes out
the first ten natural numbers as a JSON array at a rate of two per
second. The test registers a JSONPath selector that matches the numbers
against a callback that aborts the http request on seeing the fifth. The
correct behaviour is to get no sixth callback, even when running on a
platform lacking support for XHR2 and all ten will have already been
downloaded.

Confidently black-box testing a stateful unit is difficult. Because of
side-effects and hidden state we do not know if the same call will later
give a different behaviour. Building up the parse result from SAX events
is a fairly complex process which cannot be implemented efficiently as
stateless Javascript. To promote testability the state is delegated to a
simple state-storing unit. The intricate logic may then be expressed as
a separately tested set of side-effect free functions which transition
between one state and the next. Although proof of correctness is
impossible, for whichever results the functions give while under test,
uninfluenced by state I can be confident that they will always yield the
same response given the same future events. The separate unit
maintaining the state has exactly one responsibility, to hold the parse
result between function calls, and is trivial to test. This approach
slightly breaks with the object oriented principle of encapsulation by
hiding state behind the logic which acts on it but I feel that the
departure is justified by the more testable codebase.

To enhance testability Oboe has also embraced dependency injection.
Components do not instantiate their dependencies but rather rely on them
being passed in by an inversion of control container during the wiring
phase. For example, the network component which hides browser
differences does not know how to create the underlying XHR that it
adapts. Undoubtedly, by not instantiating its own transport this
component presents a less friendly interface: it's data source is no
longer a hidden implementation detail but exposed as a part of the it's
API at the responsibility of the caller. I feel this is mitigated by the
interface being purely internal. Dependency injection in this case
allows the tests to be written more simply because it is easy to
substitute the real XHR for a stub. Unit tests should test exactly one
unit, were the streaming http object to create its own transport, the
XHR would also be under test, plus whichever external service it
connects to. Because Javascript allows redefinition of built in types
the stubbing could have potentially also be done by overwriting the XHR
constructor to return a mock. However this is to be avoided as it opens
up the possibility of changes to the environment leaking between test
cases.

Running the tests
-----------------

![**Relationship between various files and test libraries** *other half
of sketch from notebook*](images/placeholder.png)

The Grunt task runner is used to automate routine tasks such as
executing the tests and building, configured so that the unit and
component tests run automatically whenever a change is made to a source
file or specification. As well as executing correctly, the project is
required not to surpass a certain size so this also checked on every
save. Because Oboe is a small, tightly focused project the majority of
the programming time is spent refactoring already working code. Running
tests on save provides quick feedback so that mistakes are found before
my mind has moved on to the next context. Agile practitioners emphasise
the importance of tests that execute quickly [@cleancode p.314:T9] --
Oboe's 220 unit and component tests run in less than a second so
discovering programming mistakes is almost instant. If the "content of
any medium is always another medium‚Äù [@media p.8], we might say that the
content of programming is the process that is realised by its execution.
A person working in a physical medium sees the thing they are making but
the programmer does usually not see their program's execution
simultaneously as they create. Conway notes that an artisan works by
transform-in-place "start with the working material in place and you
step by step transform it into its final form," but software is created
through intermediate proxies. He attempts to close this gap by merging
programming with the results of programming [@humanize pp.8-9]. I feel
that if we bring together the medium and the message by viewing the
result of code while we write it, we can build as a series of small,
iterative, correct steps and programming can be more explorative and
expressive. Running the tests subtly, automatically hundreds of times
per day builds isn't merely convenient, this build process makes me a
better programmer.

Integration tests are not run on save. They intentionally simulate a
slow network so they take some time to run and I'd already have started
the next micro-task by the time they complete. Oboe is version
controlled using git and hosted on github. The integration tests are
used as the final check before a branch in git is merged into the
master.

Packaging to a single distributable file
----------------------------------------

As an interpreted language Javascript may be run without any prior
compilation. Directly running the files that are open in the editor is
convenient while programming but, unless a project is written as a
single file, in practice some build phase is required to create an
easily distributable form. Dependency managers have not yet become
standard for client-side web development so dependant libraries are
usually manually downloaded. For a developer wishing to include my
library in their own project a single file is much more convenient than
the multi-file raw source. If they are not using a similar build process
on their site, a single file is also faster to transfer to their users,
mostly because the http overhead is of constant size per resource.

Javascript files are interpreted in series by the browser so load-time
dependencies must precede dependants. If several valid Javascript files
are concatenated in the same order as delivered to the browser, the
joined version is functionally equivalent to the individual files. This
is a common technique so that code can be written and debugged as many
files but distributed as one. Several tools exist to automate this stage
of the build process that topologically sort the dependency graph before
concatenation in order to find a suitable script order.

Early in the project I chose *Require.js* for this task. Javascript as a
language doesn't have an import statement. Require contributes the
importing ability to Javascript from inside the language itself by
providing an asynchronous `require` function. Calls to `require` AJAX in
and execute the imported source, passing any exported items to the given
callback. For non-trivial applications loading each dependency
individually over AJAX is intended only for debugging because making so
many requests is slow. For efficient delivery Require also has the
`optimise` command which concatenates an application into a single file
by using static analysis to deduce a workable source order. Because the
`require` function may be called from anywhere, this is undecidable in
the general case so Require falls back to lazy loading. In practice this
isn't a problem because imports are generally not subject to branching.
For larger webapps lazy loading is a feature because it speeds up the
initial page load. The technique of *Asynchronous Module Definition*
(AMD) intentionally imports rarely-loaded modules in response to events;
by resisting static analysis the dependant Javascript will not be
downloaded until it is needed. AMD is mostly of interest to applications
with a central hub but also some rarely used parts. For example, most
visits to online banking will not need to create standing orders so it
is better if this part is loaded on-demand rather than increase the
initial page load time.

I hoped to use Require's `optimise` to automate the creation of a
combined Javascript file for Oboe. Oboe would not benefit from AMD
because everybody who uses it will use all of the library but using
Require to find a working source order would save having to manually
implement one. Unfortunately this was not feasible. Even after
optimisation, Require's design necessitates that calls to the `require`
function are left in the code and that the Require run-time component is
available to handle them. At more than 5k gzipped this would have more
than doubled Oboe's download footprint.

After removing Require I decided to pick up the simplest tool which
could possibly work. With about 15 source files and a fairly sparse
dependency graph finding a working order on paper wasn't a daunting
task. Combined with a Grunt analogue to the unix `cat` command I quickly
had a working build process and a distributable library requiring no
run-time dependency management to be loaded.

For future consideration there is Browserify. This library reverses the
'browser first' Javascript mindset by viewing Node as the primary target
for Javascript development and adapting the browser environment to
match. Browserify converts applications written for Node into a single
file packaged for delivery to a web browser. Significantly, other than
Adaptors wrapping the browser APIs and presenting their features as if
they were the Node equivalents, Browserify leaves no trace of itself in
the final Javascript. Additionally, the http adaptor[^1] is capable of
using XHRs as a streaming source when used with supporting browsers.

After combining into a single file Javascript source can be made
significantly smaller by *minification* techniques such as reducing
scoped symbols to a single character or deleting the comments. For Oboe
the popular minifier library *Uglify* was chosen. Uglify performs only
surface optimisations, concentrating mostly on producing compact syntax
by manipulating the code's abstract syntax tree. I also considered
Google's *Closure Compiler* which resembles a traditional optimiser by
leveraging a deeper understanding of the code semantics. Unfortunately,
proving equivalence in highly dynamic languages is often impossible and
Closure Compiler is only safe given a well-advised subset of Javascript.
It delivers no reasonable guarantee of equivalence if code is not
written as the Closure team expected. Integration tests would catch any
such failures but for the time being I decided that even given the
micro-library limits, a slightly larger file is a worthwhile tradeoff
for a safer build process

Styles of Programming
---------------------

Oboe does not follow any single programming paradigm and is made of components written in
a mix of procedural, functional and object-oriented programming styles.
Classical object orientation is used only so far as the library exposes
an Object-oriented public API. Although Javascript supports them,
classes and constructors are not used, nor is there any inheritance or
notable polymorphism.
Closures form the primary means of data storage and hiding. Most
entities do not give a
Javascript object on instantiation, they are constructed as a set of
event handlers with access to shared values from a common closure. As
inner-functions of the same containing function, the handlers share
access to variables from the containing scope and their reachability is
maintained because they are referenced by the event bus. From outside
the closure the values are not only private as would be seen in an OO
model, they are inherently unaddressable.

Although not following an established object orientated metamodel, the
high-level design hasn't departed very far from what could be made
following that style. If we wish to think in terms of the OO paradigm we
might say that values trapped inside the closure are private class attributes
and that handlers it registers on the event bus are the class' public methods. In
this regard, the high-level internal design of Oboe could be discussed
using terms from a more standard object oriented metamodel.

Javascript is of course an imperative language but over many iterations
Oboe has evolved towards a declarative programming style. For example,
incrementalContentBuilder.js [incrementalContentBuilder.js](#incrementalContentBuilder.js)
(Appendix p.\pageref{incrementalContentBuilder.js}). was initially stateful and
procedural, reading as instructions to perform a task. Over many
refactors the flavour of the code has changed, now reading more like
a description of desired behaviour.

Event where it creates a larger deliverable
library I have generally preferred writing as short functions which can be 
joined together into longer ones. Short functions
reduce the size of the minimum testable unit and allow very simple 
unit tests.
Because of the pressures on code size I decided not to use a general
purpose functional library and created my own with only the parts
that are needed. See [functional.js](#functional.js)
(Appendix p.\pageref{functional.js}).  
Functional programming in
Javascript is known to be slower than other styles, particularly under
Firefox because it lacks optimisation such as Lambda Lifting
[@functionalSpiderMonkey]. Considering to what degree performance
concerns should dissuade us from a functional style, we may consider the
library's execution context. Because of the single-threaded model any
application's Javascript execution is in between frames serving
concurrent concerns so to minimise the impact on latency for the other
tasks it is important that no task occupies the CPU for very long. On
the browser about 16ms is a fair maximum, allowing painting to occur at
60 frames per second. In Node there is no hard limit but any CPU-hogging
task degrades the responsiveness of other responses. Context switching
imposes a very low overhead and responsive sharing generally proffers
many small frames over a few larger ones. In any case, server-side tasks
especially are more often i/o bound than CPU bound. Oboe's progressive
design naturally splits tasks which would otherwise be performed in a
single frame over many. For example, parsing and marshaling. Although
the overall computation may be higher, the total performance of the
system should be improved.


Incrementally building up the content
-------------------------------------

As shown in figure \ref{overallDesign}, there is an incremental content
builder and ascent tracer which handle the output from the Clarinet JSON
SAX parser. Taken together, these might be considered a variant of the
Adaptor pattern, providing to the controller a simpler interface than is
presented by Clarinet. However, this is not the model implementation of
the pattern; the adapted interface is even-driven rather than
call-driven: we receive six kinds of event and in response emmit from a
narrower vocabulary of two.

To evaluate JSONPath expressions the controller requires a path to the
current JSON node, the node itself, and any ancestor nodes. This is
delivered by the incremental content builder as the payload of the
NODE\_FOUND and PATH\_FOUND events. For each Clarinet event the builder
provides a corresponding function which, working from the current path,
returns the next path after the event has been applied. For example, the
`objectopen` and `arrayopen` events move the current node deeper in the
document and are handled by adding new items to the path, whereas for
`closeobject` and `closearray` we remove one. Over the course of parsing
a complete JSON file the path will in this way be manipulated to visit
every node, allowing each to be tested against the registered JSONPath
expressions. Internally, the builder's event handlers are declared as
the combination of a smaller number of basic reusable handler parts.
Oboe is largely unconcerned regarding a JSON node's type so given that
several of the Clarinet events differ only by the type of the nodes they
announce, Oboe is able to generify their handling by composing from a
common pool of handler-parts. Picking up `openobject` and `openarray`
events, both fall through to the same 'nodeFound', differing only in a
parameter. Similarly, consider the `value` event which is fired when
Clarinet encounters a String or Number. Because primitive nodes are
always leaves the builder regards this as a node which instantaneously
starts and ends, handled programmatically as the functional composition
of the `nodeFound` and `curNodeFinished`. The reuse of smaller
instructions to build up larger ones is perhaps slightly reminiscent of
CISC CPU design in which micro-instructions are combined to implement
the chip's advertised interface.

Although the builder functions are stateless, ultimately the state
regarding the current path needs to be stored between clarinet calls.
This is handled by the ascent tracker. This tiny component merely serves
as a holder for this data, starting from an empty path it passes the
path to each builder function and stores the result to be given to the
next one.

![List representation of an ascent from leaf to root of a JSON tree.
Note the special ROOT token which represents the path mapping to the
root node (of course nothing maps to the root) - this is an object,
taking advantage of object identity to ensure that the token is unequal
to anything but itself. This list form is built up by the incremental
content builder and is the format that compiled JSONPath expressions
test against for matches \label{ascent}](images/ascent.png)

The path of the current node is maintained as a singly linked list, with
each list element holding the field name and the node and the node
itself, see figure \ref{ascent}. The list is arranged with the JSON root
at the far end and the current node at the head. As we traverse the JSON
the current node is appended and removed many times whereas the root is
immutable. This ordering was chosen because it is computationally very
efficient since all updates to the list are at the head. Each link in
the list is immutable, enforced by newer Javascript engines as frozen
objects [^2].

Linked lists were chosen in preference to the more conventional approach
of using native Javascript Arrays for several reasons. Firstly, I find
this area of the program more easy to test and debug given immutable
data structures. Handling native Arrays without mutating would be very
expensive because on each new path the array would have to be copied
rather than edited in-place. Unpicking a stack trace is easier if I know
that every value revealed is the value that has always occupied that
space because I don't have to think four-dimensionally projecting my
mind forwards and back in time to different values that were there when
the variable was used. The lack of side effects means I can try explore
new commands in the debugger's CLI without worrying about breaking the
execution of the program. Most Javascript virtual machines are also
quite poor at array growing and shrinking so for collections whose size
changes often are outperformed by linked lists. Finally, this is a very
convenient format for the JSONPath engine to perform matching on as will
be discussed in the next section. The Javascript file [lists.js](#lists.js)
(Appendix p.\pageref{lists.js})
implements the list functions: `cons`, `head`, `tail`, `map`, `foldR`,
`all`, 'without' as well as converting lists to and from arrays.

Because it is more common to quote paths as descents rather than ascent,
on the boundary to the outside world Oboe reverses the order and,
because Javascript programmers will not be familiar with this structure,
converts to arrays.

Oboe JSONPath Implementation
----------------------------

Not surprisingly given its importance, the JSONPath implementation is
one of the most refactored and considered parts of the Oboe codebase.
Like many small languages, on the first commit it was little more than a
series of regular expressions[^3] but has slowly evolved into a
featureful and efficient implementation[^4]. The extent of the rewriting
was possible because the correct behaviour is well defined by test
specifications[^5].

The JSONPath compiler exposes a single higher-order function to the rest
of Oboe. This function takes a JSONPath as a String and, proving it is a
valid expression, returns a function which tests for matches to the
JSONPath. Both the compiler and the functions that it generates benefit
from being stateless. The type of the compiler, expressed as Haskell
syntax would be:

~~~~ {.haskell}
String -> Ascent -> JsonPathMatchResult
~~~~

The match result is either a failure to match, or a hit, with the node
that matched. In the case of path matching, the node may currently be
unknown. If the pattern has a clause prefixed with `$`, the node
matching that clause is captured and returned as the result. Otherwise,
the last clause is implicitly capturing.

The usage profile for JSONPath expressions in Oboe is to be compiled
once and then evaluated many times, once for each node encountered while
parsing the JSON. Because matching is performed perhaps hundreds of
times per file the most pressing performance consideration is for
matching to execute quickly, the time required to compile is relatively
unimportant. Oboe's JSONPath design contrasts with JSONPath's reference
implementation which, because it provides a first order function,
freshly reinterprets the JSONPath string each time it is invoked.

The compilation is performed by recursively by examining the left-most
side of the string for a JSONPath clause. For each kind of clause there
is a function which matches ascents against that clause, for example by
checking the name field. By partial completion this function is
specialised to match against one particular name. Once a clause function
is generated, compilation recurs by passing to itself the remaining
unparsed portion of the JSONPath string. This continues until it is
called with a zero-length JSONPath. On each recursive call the clause
function is wrapped in the result from the next recursive call,
resulting ultimately in a linked series of clause functions. When
evaluated against an ascent, each clause functions examines the head of
the ascent and passes the ascent onto the next function if it passes. A
special clause functions, `skip1` is used for the `.` syntax and places
no condition on the head of the ascent but passes on to the next clause
only the tail, thus moving evaluation of the ascent one node up the
parsed JSON tree. Similarly, there is a `skipMany` which maps onto the
`..` syntax and recursively consumes nodes until it can find a match in
the next clause.

JsonPath implementation allows the compilation of complex expressions
into an executable form, but each part implementing the executable form
is locally simple. By using recursion, assembling the simple functions
into a more function expressing a more complex rule also follows as
being locally simple but gaining a usefully sophisticated behaviour
through composition of simple parts. Each recursive call of the parser
identifies one token for non-empty input and then recursively digests
the rest.

As an example, the pattern `!.$person..{height tShirtSize}` once
compiled would roughly resemble the Javascript functional representation
below:

~~~~ {.javascript}
statementExpr(             // wrapper, added when JSONPath is zero-length 
   duckTypeClause(         // token 6, {height tShirtSize}
      skipMany(            // token 5, '..'  
         capture(          // token 4, css4-style '$' notation
            nameClause(    // token 3, 'person'
               skip1(      // token 2, '.'  
                  rootExpr // token 1, '!' at start of JSONPath expression
               ) 
            'person' )
         )
   ), ['height', 'tShirtSize'])
)      
~~~~

Since I am only using a side-effect free subset of Javascript for this
segment of Oboe it would be safe to use a functional cache. As well as
saving time by avoiding repeated execution, this could potentially also
save memory because where two JSONPath strings contain a common start
they could share the inner parts of their functional expression.
Although Javascript doesn't come with functional caching, it can be
added using the language itself [^6]. I suspect, however, that hashing
the parameters might be slower than performing the matching. Although
the parameters are all immutable and could in theory be hashed by object
identity, in practice there is no way to access an object id from inside
the language so any hash of a node parsed out of JSON would have to walk
the entire subtree rooted from that node.

The JSONPath tokenisation is split out into its own file and separately
tested. The tokenisation implementation is based on regular expressions,
they are the simplest form able to express the clause patterns. The
regular expressions are hidden to the outside the tokenizer and only
functions are exposed to the main body of the compiler. The regular
expressions all start with `^` so that they only match at the head of
the string. A more elegant alternative is the 'y' [^7] flag but as of
now this lacks wide browser support.

By verifying the tokens through their own unit tests it is simpler to
thoroughly specify the tokenisation, producing simpler failure messages
than if it were done through the full JSONPath engine. We might consider
the unit test layer of the pyramid (figure \ref{testpyramid}) is further
split into two sub-layers. Arguably, the upper of these sub-layer is not
a unit test because it is verifying two units together. There is some
redundancy with the tokens being tested both individually and as full
expressions. I maintain that this is the best approach regardless
because stubbing out the tokenizer functions would be a considerable
effort and would not improve the rigor of the JSONPath specification.

![Some kind of diagram showing jsonPath expressions and functions
partially completed to link back to the previous function. Include the
statementExpr pointing to the last clause](images/placeholder)

[^1]: https://github.com/substack/http-browserify

[^2]: See
    https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global\_Objects/Object/freeze.
    Although older engines don't provide any ability to create immutable
    objects at run-time, we can be fairly certain that the code does not
    mutate these objects or the tests would fail when run in
    environments which are able to enforce this.

[^3]: JSONPath compiler from the first commit can be found at line 159
    here:
    https://github.com/jimhigson/oboe.js/blob/a17db7accc3a371853a2a0fd755153b10994c91e/src/main/progressive.js\#L159

[^4]: for contrast, the current source can be found at
    https://github.com/jimhigson/oboe.js/blob/master/src/jsonPath.js

[^5]: The current tests are viewable at
    https://github.com/jimhigson/oboe.js/blob/master/test/specs/jsonPath.unit.spec.js
    and
    https://github.com/jimhigson/oboe.js/blob/master/test/specs/jsonPathTokens.unit.spec.js

[^6]: Probably the best known example being `memoize` from
    Underscore.js: http://underscorejs.org/\#memoize

[^7]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Regular\_Expressions
